What, did you sort of want to say something about the—
When we first spoke of Jack early on in there, and I said that Jack had invited me over,
and this was in 1975.
I thought there maybe it was 1976, and I came over and Jack signed some of the books for
us.
We did a limited edition, signed numbered edition, and Jack lives up in the hills there
in the Bay Area, and his house is up on the side of a hill, and a long narrow winding
driveway goes up through the trees to his house.
I went up and met him and got to know him after a little while, and been over there a
number of times since then, just to, I guess just to visit more than anything else.
I've gotten to know him and his charming wife Norma, who is kind of the one of the
background or the basis of the whole thing that goes on over there.
They're really a partnership, Jack and Norma, and their son John, who's 22 or 23 now, and
the three of them are a family unit, and they work together, and they're very close, three
of them.
Jack's quite, for a fellow who's completely unknown within the field, in terms of a personality,
no one knows him, he never goes anywhere, Jack's really a social guy, and has a number
of parties, and goes out quite a bit, and socializes quite a bit, with really a wide
variety of people.
Jack and Norma and John and I, and got to be quite good friends.
Our friendship was really not, it just started with the book, I guess, and with publishing
Jack, but that's just sort of, it's almost an excuse for us to be together, and we spent
a lot of time together, and I'm not even sure what we talk about.
A lot of what we talk about is illustration.
Jack's a great lover of classical illustration, which is to say, a Beardsley, and Kay Nielsen,
and Harry Clark, and people who were illustrating at the turn of the century, in the early 20th
century, and I guess we spent a lot of time talking about that, and a lot of time just
talking about anything but Jack's work, which we almost never discuss, it never comes up.
And last year in Baltimore, Chuck came out here to Pennsylvania, where I am now, here
visiting Chuck, and Jack came out and stayed with Chuck for a while, and they got to be
good friends.
They'd known each other only at a distance, and they spent, actually the three of us spent
some time together, four of us, I should say, Norma was there, and somehow without,
somehow without Norma sort of the key to this whole thing in a way that I can't explain,
but in any case, Chuck and Chuck's wife, and myself, and Mara, and Jack and Norma, just
got together and spent a lot of time together, and it's an unusual thing when something like
a book, or I guess a work of art in a sense, brings people together and performs the basis
of what later becomes very close friendship, and particularly in Jack's case, because Jack
never discusses his work, and it doesn't care to, somehow once he's finished a piece,
it's as if he's lost the ship, and the ship goes, sails away, and he's no longer a part
of it, and that's how he feels.
Of course, anyone wants to, you know, enjoy his recognition, and Jack should get more
than he does, but Jack's life is not really, has very little to do with literature, except
that he writes it, he doesn't associate with people who have to do with literature, his
friends are from all walks of life, many of the musicians, because Jack himself is a musician,
and enjoys music to a great extent, and you see that in his work, you see it showing up
in his books, and time and time, and that's most of what I wanted to say, I just wanted
to get a little of the personal in there, Jack's been a good friend, and he's been an
unusual fellow, and it's an unusual kind of communication, and you, if you enjoy Jack's
works like I do, would probably have the same sort of relationship or communication, because
it's with that understanding of life that is the reason that you and I both enjoy Jack's
works, because he sees things a certain way, and reacts to things a certain way, and just
sees a certain colors or whatever, and life around them, and it's interesting and a pleasure
to communicate with a person like that, because you can speak of certain things that normally
might never come up in your life, otherwise, it may never come up in your casual conversation
with your friends, or your business associates, or whatever, and Jack and Norma, and I and
Chuck all share that kind of communication, it's sort of a rare thing, and not really
something that can be surrounded or defined by words.
Okay, that's very good. Listen, as long as you brought it up, can I shoot a couple more
quick ones at you?
Why not?
When we spoke to him, I asked him a question about essentially like what do you want to
be remembered for, or what's your conception of your own work, and so forth, and he replied
in this way, and I think he was joking, he said, I want to be remembered as a rich science
fiction writer.
How would you respond to his conception of his own work?
Well, Jack, he's stepping into a role there to avoid a question which I guess any writer
might want to avoid, I don't know. I know Jack is offended by artists who take themselves
too seriously, and that, as you know, is a real problem with artists and writers today,
is once they take themselves seriously, then they're finished really. Most of them are
finished as originators or as true artists. And so Jack refuses to take himself seriously
and does not act like an artist, or plonk like an artist, or whatever, and as far as
being a rich science fiction writer, I don't know. If Jack had wanted to be rich, he could
have, he did some work in Hollywood and he could have stayed down there, or he could
have gone through the motions like a lot of other writers and appeared on the shows and
publicized his own work and promoted his own work, and he didn't do that, and this was
by personal inclination and by choice. So as far as what he wants to be remembered for,
Jack always says that he wants his work to stand for by itself, and I think he just
wants to be remembered for his work. He refuses to pick favorites among his work. I know he
likes his Demon Prince series a lot for good reason. He likes The Palace of Love, which
is the third in that series. He likes the Eyes of the Overworld, the sequence of the
stories of the fellow Cougal, and that's partly because Cougal's a rascal and Vance
and Stoff is a bit of a rascal, and Cougal's even more so. He's the kind of a rascal that
Vance would like to be if he wasn't such a nice guy at heart.
Would he mind if we put a quote like that on our show from you?
Oh, not at all, Jack. In fact, if I were to sit here and insult Jack and call the guy
a lot of names, he would probably enjoy hearing it on the radio simply as a practical joke.
Those kind of situations occur in Jack's book where one person who was helpless to defend
himself or reply gets smeared in public or private. I won't do that to Jack, but Jack
certainly would not mind it.
Okay, listen also, when I spoke with him, near the end of the interview I was asking
about his future work and so forth, and he mentioned that book he just finished and what
he might have planned. Just in your personal opinion, are there as many or are there some
more really good books that he is going to be writing? I kind of got the impression he
wondered if he still had it, if he could still write up to the standards he had set for himself.
Well, that's, you know, every writer feels that, particularly when they're not finished
with the work and Jack is finishing up this work and he's this lioness, this large fantasy
work which takes place on earth. Lioness is kind of like Averon, it's some kind of mythical
island offshore or Britain somewhere if you wanted to locate it. It's sometime in the
far past and it's a magical place with elves and trolls and beings like that.
And yeah, I think this is a major work and I think there will be a few more. Jack's writing
fewer books but he's going to write just a few large major pieces now. He's kind of
done fooling around. One of the reasons he's writing, he was writing all these kind of
unrelated books and these books, they weren't short but they certainly weren't long, was
that no one would pay him to do any differently and he was making money as a writer and no
one would, until Berkeley gave him a reasonable advance on the work that he's doing now which
allowed him to work for a year or two on it, uninterrupted. I mean there's economic reasons
for this sort of thing. So he finally had the stature and found a publisher that believed
in him. Don Mulheim also has done a good deal for Jack, put a lot of his books out, got
them all back into print but Berkeley will be publishing this particular book and he's
been able to do it so he's doing that. And Jack when he wrote the last two of the Demon
Prince books, they all were the same. He re-read the first three and he thought, you know,
God these are really good books and they are in fact astounding works of literature and
he wondered if he could, if he was up to snuff, if he could still write like that and then
he sat down and wrote two more and they were very different than the first three but they
were as good. And in fact some people liked them better. I guess it's a matter of preference
but I think what you heard was a writer just thinking to himself. I've read a little bit
of the work that he's, that it's the thing that he's working on now and there's some
tremendous stuff in there. That's all I can say about it.
Okay, I can think of one more. This is sort of a personal opinion question too just between
two Jack Vance fans. I suppose any writer has to put some of himself into his characters.
You mentioned that maybe there's a little of Vance in Cougal for instance. In my reading
of his work I would say that maybe in the Durdain trilogy the protagonist, Gastel Lettswain,
of all the characters Vance has written about, to me that would seem closest to what I would
conceive of him as being. How would you respond to that?
Yeah, you've got it there and also there's a lot of Vance in Inferio, in the man and
his son, you know, because Jack and Norma are both very close to their son John and Inferio
in a sense was kind of written I think for John to read at some later date in his life.
John and his son John doesn't read any of his father's books and I think Jack wrote that
book for John and I would say yes. I'd say Durdain and Jack likes that series a lot and
they're really mature works. Yeah, there's a lot of them in there because Jack is a musician
and just a musician going out into the world and finding things out about himself and the
world around him. But Cougal also, you know, Jack's a bit of a rascal and that part of
him happens to be Cougal.
Are you going to do Durdain by the way?
Yeah.
I'm looking forward to that one, that's probably my favorite.
Yeah. Yeah, that's, some people feel that way. People really like that series.
No, you're right. When you said it was a mature work, I think that's very subtle.
Yeah. Yeah. Listen, our connection is kind of getting bad now anyhow and I think that's
probably all the time we bettered.
Very good.
Just a second. David has, oh, David wants to know if you're going to do the hardcover
blindness ever.
Yeah, as a matter of fact we're planning to do that because Berkley's probably going
to issue it as a trade paperback. So if it works out, yes, we are going to do a hardcover
edition of that.
And so theoretically yours would be the first hardcover?
Yeah, it'll be the first edition also if we can precede them.
Yeah.
And it'll be a small edition, probably 700 copies, whatever.
Yeah, we're going to stay on your mailing list then.
Good.
Listen, we sure appreciate your time again and thank you very much.
Okay.
Yeah. Okay.
If you have any other questions or whatever just call me at home or call Chuck here.
We might do that. Thank you.
Very good.
Thank you. Bye.